---
{}
---
***
# Texte 25 - Jerry Falwell, *Listen America* ( 1980 )
***
## Introduction

« I am just one of many thousands called to be an evangelist. » once said the American evangelist preacher Billy Graham. Indeed in the era following World War II, from the late 1960s to early 1970s  occurred according historians the Fourth Great Awakening. This revival of religious enthusiasm in America’s society finds its roots in the history of American evangelicalism, a Protestant movement born in the eighteenth century in the Congregational churches of New England praising for the renew of a vital and fervent relationship with God after a period of moral decline. The influential American theologian of the eighteenth century Johnathan Edwards contributed to define evangelicalism around three principles : the necessity for any man, considered as naturally sinful, of a personal « rebirth » or second birth, in which an individual experiences personal conversion and accepts the Christ as his Savior ; the authority of the Bible as God's revelation to humanity and evangelism that is to say spreading the Gospel. In 1925 happened the Scopes Monkey Trial, a landmark legal case that pitted modernists and fundamentalists protestants against each other. The trial centred around a high school science teacher named John T. Scopes, who was accused of violating Tennessee's Butler Act, which prohibited the teaching of evolution in public schools. Thus emerged fundamental Christianity as a reaction to theological liberalism and cultural modernism. It based its theological beliefs in *The Fundamentals*, a twelve-volume set of essays written in the 1910s by conservative Protestant theologians. After World War II, evangelicalism has experienced a revival with the emergence of mass  media. With the support National Association of Evangelicals created in 1942 charismatic and eloquent evangelical preachers became nationally and internationally known for their sermons broadcasted on the radio or on TV. This religious awakening led to the creation of numerous « mega-churches » in the United States gathering thousands of people and offering a variety of educational and social activities. During the 1950s, the number of church members in America grew from 64.5 million to 114.5 million. In the 1960s with the development of counterculture, the sexual revolution and the events of 1968 many white evangelicals feared the secularisation of America’s identity and became politically active and involved in the Christian right, an informal coalition of Christian political factions which became an important voting bloc in the Republican Party. During this period, Engel v. Vitale in 1962 and Roe v. Wade in 1973 were two landmark Supreme court cases that had a significant impact on American Evangelicalism. The first ruled that organized prayer in public schools violated the First Amendment's Establishment Clause, which prohibits the government from establishing an official religion and the second legalised abortion nationwide. Theses decisions were seen by many Evangelicals as an attack to traditional Christian values and led to the emergence of the pro-life movement and more broadly speaking to a massive evangelical commitment in secular affairs. In this context, the conservative Christian pastor, televangelist, and political activist Jerry Falwell ( 1933 - 2007 ) rose to national prominence. During the 1950s and the 1960s he founded Thomas Road Baptist mega-church and created The Old-Time Gospel Hour, a nationally syndicated radio and television ministry. He campaigned against the civil rights activist and the racial desegregation of public school systems and created the Liberty University of Lynchburg, a Christian segregation university in Virginia. In 1979 he founded the Moral Majority, a large political lobby group for evangelical Christians that sought to promote Christian conservative values such as opposition to abortion an gay rights  and influence American politics. It became an indispensable part of the Republican party’s electoral base and played a key role in the election of Ronald Reagan as President in 1980. During the campaign Reagan declared « I endorse you » to a crowd of cheering evangelicals in Dallas and  Jerry Falwell multiplied his sermons. He published a book called *Listen America* where he calls to action American Evangelicals, urging them to become more politically active to preserve the Nation for its moral decline and praises for a national religious revival. 
Thus, it behoves us to ask how Jerry Falwell couples in this text fundamentalist Christianity with conservative Republicanism to praise for a spiritual and political rebirth of America and thus confirming the Moral majority’s support to Reagan’s candidacy ? 
In a first place, this text appears clearly as evangelical sermon preaching the necessity of a spiritual « rebirth » of the nation. But it is also a conservative stance that denounces the amoral political and civil forces that threatens the country and tries to conciliate Christianity and capitalism. In the end, spiritual and political affairs seem to converge in a televangelist speech addressed to a « Moral majority » and that praises the urgent need of leadership to initiate a national revival meeting and make the country in the image of a megachurch. 


## I. An evangelical sermon preaching the necessity of a spiritual renewal of the nation 

In Listen America, Jerry Falwell delivers an evangelical sermon that emphasises the importance of a spiritual renewal of the nation. The text is written in a parable-like style, employing biblical vocabulary and adopting an eschatological tone. Falwell argues that the nation needs to experience a spiritual « rebirth » in order to counter the moral decay that he sees as pervasive in American society. He defends a literal and revealed interpretation of the Bible, arguing that the text offers the solution to the nation's problems.

### A ) A parable-like text with biblical vocabulary : dispensationalism and apocalyptic point of view : spiritual decline of a nation 

First of all, one must notice that the writer of this text is a evangelical preacher and therefore that it is written as a sermon. For instance he uses repetitive formulas like « They have been … »  or « as a preacher of the Gospel » . In this manner Falwell affirms his status of clerk. He writes « I have listened to God’s admonitions » probably referring to his own « rebirth » in 1952. To present what he sees as a spiritual decline of a nation Jerry Falwell adopts a eschatological and prophetical tone. He uses biblical vocabulary ( « burden », « evils » , « redemption » « fallen race », « sins » ) to describe with dread the « inevitable destruction » of America’s nation. Indeed, Falwell also uses metaphorical images like in a parable to depicts this moral decline as an apocalypse. For instance, he talks about the « very dark clouds on America’s horizon » and the « evils and the destruction that have fallen upon every other nation that has turned its back on God. ». The health metaphor also contributes to this prophecy announcing the nation’s destruction. 

### B ) The necessity of a spiritual « rebirth » of the Nation 

But faithful to the principles of evangelicalism this text also calls for a spiritual « rebirth » of the Nation. Indeed he writes : « If it is healed inwardly, then it will heal itself outwardly ». In evangelical Christianity, rebirth is considered to be a necessary step in salvation. It is believed that without being « born again », a person cannot enter the kingdom of God. This is based on Jesus' words in John 3:3, where he says, « Very truly I tell you, no one can see the kingdom of God unless they are born again. ». This concept is also intertwined with the Protestant concept of  Great Awakening. The Great Awakening was a series of three religious revivals that occurred in the American colonies and Europe during the 18th and the late 20th centuries in periods of moral decline led by evangelical ministers. It is clear that in the context of the rise of televangelism from the 1960s to 1980 Falwell tries to spark a kind of a fourth Great Awakening. That’s why he makes the observation of a contemporary nihilism writing that young people « have been taught that there are no absolutes in our world today. » and that the nation might dangerously « turned its back on God ». In response Falwell calls for a national rebirth of the nation at all scales of the society : « If our President, our judiciary system, and our state and local leaders will take their stand on holy living, we can turn this country around. ». More explicitly Falwell declares : « We must have a revival in this country ». And this « revival » implies that the country must come « back to basics, back to the values, back to biblical morality … ». 

### C ) Defending a literal and revealed interpretation of the Bible 

And among theses « basics » is the Bible. We find here one of the main principles of Christian fundamentalism that derives from Protestants’ attachment to the scripture : Biblical inerrancy and biblical literalism that is to say the idea that it is without error or fault in all its teaching and that it is the word of God. Indeed, this text defends a literal and revealed interpretation of the Bible. That is why it denounces the fact that young people « have been taught that the Bible is just another book of literature ». Falwell is probably to several elements like modernist theology that interprets Christian teaching by taking into consideration modern knowledge, science and ethics but also like the Scopes Monkey Trial of 1925 and to the Engel v. Vitale supreme court case and more broadly speaking to the progressive secularisation of education and Biblical studies in America. Falwell praises a « return to biblical basics » or « biblical morality » that is to say to biblical literalism. For instance he writes : « The most positive people in the world are people who believe the Bible to be the Word of God. » or that the Bible was a book writter « under divine inspiration ». A principle that he made the center of Lynchburg Baptist College’s teaching. 
To sum up, this text appears as an evangelical sermon, using the images and concepts of protestant eschatology to call for a return to Christian fundamentalism beliefs and a « rebirth » of the nation in the person of Christ. Nevertheless, facing what he saw as a inevitable spiritual decline of America, Falwell had realised that evangelical preachers must leave their ministry and go down into secular affairs to save the Nation from « the trends of decay ». In other words, in the mass era, the preacher had to enter in politics. 

## II. A conservative stance that  denounces the amoral forces that threatens the country and tries to conciliate Christianity and capitalism

Falwell also illustrates evangelicalism’s entry in secular affairs. In the context of 1980’s presidential election evangelicals supported Reagan’s conservative views. Indeed, Falwell takes a conservative stance in his sermon, denouncing the amoral forces threatening the country’s health. He also tries to Christianise capitalist values to argue against socialism and welfare programs. Falwell is critical of progressive trends like the civil rights movement, feminism and the sexual revolution that he sees as contributing to the nation's moral decay. In response, he praises the Christian values of family and faithful patriotism as the antidote to these trends.

### A ) A anti-socialist and anti-welfare stance that identifies capitalism and christian morality 

First of all, this text takes an anti-socialist and anti-welfare stance that identifies capitalism and christian morality. Indeed, Falwell and the Moral Majority played a key role in mobilising conservative Christian voters to support Reagan's candidacy. They agree in particular on the issue of « welfarism ». Indeed the 1970s saw the expansion of several welfare programs, including Medicaid, the Food Stamp Program, and the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program. Conservative critics argued that it created a culture of dependency and discouraged work. That’s why Falwell denounces the fact that young people « have been taught to believe that the world owes them a living whether they work or not ». They also agree on the outright rejection of « socialism » , perceived as foreign threat linked with communism that threatens directly America’s capitalism and culture of individualism. This hatred towards redistribution of wealth and collective property reveals the « elective affinities » that Max Weber pointed out in 1905 between the Protestant ethic and the Spirit of capitalism. Indeed, Falwell identifies capitalist principles ( private property, work, individual responsibility  ) with Christian values. Man must submit to God’s burden and work « by the sweat of his brow ». In this sense Fawell writes that « America was built on integrity, on faith in God and on hard work. » or evokes the « dignity » and the « importance of work ».

### B ) A anti-progressive stance against the « trends of decay »

But this anti-progressive stance is broader. Falwell in *Listen America* defends Christian morality against the « trends of decay » that defines a secularised America. That is why he goes on a crusade against an imbroglio of different moral trends that he all identifies as a pure source of evil. Firstly this « different world » is a secular one. About the young people Falwell writes : « From the television set they have learned situation ethics and immorality ». « Situation ethics » refers to a moral theory that emphasises the context of moral decisions and actions, rather than rigid adherence to rules or principles. It was developed by the American modernist theologian Joseph Fletcher in the 1960s. According Falwell this « secular humanism » is also taught in schools. This comment probably refers to Engel v. Vitale ( 1926 ) and the Scopes monkey trial but also to Christian fundamentalism and its views on biblical inerrancy and anti-evolutionnism. Falwell also criticises counterculture and the the spirit of sixty-eight. Indeed he denounces the « drug culture » and implicitly evokes the demonstrations against the Vietnam War by writing : « We were not out demonstrating against our boys who were dying ». So, according to Falwell, the America of 1980 wallows in « immorality ». Young people « have learned a loss of respect for human life » and lost their « moral sanity ». With these formulas Falwell also affirms Christian  anti-progressive positions on « certain moral issues » concerning the « homosexual revolution», the « feminist revolution » and the « Equal rights Amendment ». One must reminds that Christian fundamentalism is also characterised by sexism ( Eve being the source of the original sin and an inferior being  ), homophobia and racism. Indeed during the 1950s Falwell’s Lynchburg university was a segregationist schools. These were private white schools established  in response to the landmark Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education in 1954, which declared segregation in public schools unconstitutional. Thus we can see how this fundamentalist Christian stance rejects in its entirety moral liberalisation and emancipation movements in the name of piety and moral « righteousness ». Further in the text, Falwell associates willingly the « liberals » with « the pornographers, the smut peddlers, and those who are corrupting our youth ».

### C ) A praise of the christian values of family and a faithful patriotism

In response to this moral decadence Falwell praises the christian values of family and responsibility and defends a faithful and obedient conception of patriotism. Indeed he denounces the fact that young people « have learned to disrespect the family as God has established it » and defends the values of « home » and « family ». Moreover by referring to « Our Founding Fathers » he also praises for a rapprochement between faith and politics. If the First Amendment established « separated church and state in function » according to Falwell’s interpretation of the Constitution « good people in America must exert an influence and provide a conscience and climate of morality. ». Considering that he showed the adverse consequences of a « governement void of God » he writes : « our republic now lies with the Christian public » and stresses the importance of citizenship ( « responsibility of each individual », « ballot box », « good citizenship », « our country » ). This is also the meaning of his lyrical description of the pledge of Allegiance during « World War II ». Indeed since 1953 the « Pledge of Allegiance » mentions « one nation under God ». The patriotic feelings that he describes ( « goose pimples », « gratitude », « The Stars and Stripes Forever » which is the national march of America ) commune with « our boys who where dying in Europe and Asia » in a religious feeling. Indeed Falwell stresses that they « were praying for them and thanking God for them ».

To sum up, in response to the moral crise of the country Jerry Falwell brings to light the « elective affinities » between Christian fundamentalism and Conservative republicanism and stresses the importance of christian morality for the country’s health. His anti-progressive stance includes rejecting socialism and welfare programs, as well as opposing secularism and liberalisation movements like civil rights, feminism, and the sexual revolution. Falwell associates capitalist principles with Christian values, and emphasises the importance of family, hard work, and faithful patriotism. This « elective affinities » hence makes it obvious for evangelicals to give support to Reagan’s candidacy.

## III. Televangelism. A National revival meeting : a speech addressed to a « Moral majority » that praises the urgent need of leadership to pick the Nation up to make it in the image of a megachurch 

Finally Falwell conciliates spiritual and secular affairs by taking up the logic of televangelism to call on conservatives christans to vote for Ronald Reagan. Indeed, he addresses directly to its reader’s consciousness, exalting a vast « moral morality » asking for a strong leadership. The religious and the political need of a revival converges in this text in the implicit metaphor comparing the Nation to congregants experiencing a revival meeting preached by Falwell himself. 

### A ) The exaltation of a vast moral morality 

First of all, the text tries to exalt the vast « Moral majority » of evangelical believers in America’s society. Indeed the counterculture movement led to a increase of evangelicals among America’s population. One may think about the development of megachurchs or the whole stadiums that Billy Graham was able to fill entirely with believers. For instance, Falwell founded the Thomas Road Baptist Church. These churches typically offer a wide range of programs and services, including youth programs, support groups, and social outreach initiatives to create a whole evangelical sociability and to attract more and more people. In this way, Falwell evokes the « vast majority of the American public » or « the vast number of Americans who love their country ». He also constantly equivocates American people and the « Christian public » ( « I believe that Americans want to see this country […] back to biblical morality », « If Americans will face the truth… », « If 84 percent of the American people… », « good people in America », « Every American » ). In the same way he abuses of the second person plural pronoun ( « Our country », « Our Constitution », « Our nation » ). 

### B ) A call for activism and a strong leadership 

Once this moral majority is awakened by Falwell’s faithful and patriotic stance, the preacher calls directly his audience for activism. His praise of « leadership » implicitly invites his reader to support Reagan’s candidacy. Here, Falwell successes to combine evangelism and political activism. Always using the second person plural pronoun, a lot of formulas imposes to the good Christian to react against the moral decline of the nation and to defends its beliefs and values ( « We must reverse the trend », « We must… have a return to biblical basics », « we can turn this country around », « We cannot be silent », « We must turn America around » ).  This invitation to activism is intimately linked with the importance of evangelism for Christian fundamentalist. That explains for instance the reference to « God’s message of love, redemption and deliverance ». Ultimately, by referring several times to citizenship ( « ballot box » etc ) and by advocating that America has a « lack of leadership » Falwell implicitly invites its reader to support Reagan’s candidacy ( « we have a lack of leadership » at « the highest places » ). This praise for leadership is also a part of 1970’s evangelicalism. Indeed the movement precisely rekindled itself thanks to charismatic ministers called the televangelist that used radio and television to make evangelicalism's entry into the mass era and that created and administered megachurches. Thus, the need of « guidance » that stresses Falwell is here double and has a political but also spiritual meaning. 

### C ) A text that takes up the logic of televangelism by addressing directly to its reader’s consciousness and liberty   

It is therefore clear that this text takes up the logic of televangelism to mobilise its audience. Firstly by addressing directly to its reader’s consciousness. He uses repetitive formulas and calls for a burst of freedom among the believers ( « The choice is ours », « The only hopes of saving america. Are you listening too ? » ). Secondly by using a personal tone. In the text the first person singular pronoun cohabits with second person plural pronoun. Indeed the « I/We » structure is a rhetorical device that speakers use to gather a community. In the same way the use of personal anecdotes like the Pledge of allegiance in the text  ( « I personally … as far as I’m concerned… I remember » ) is also a typical feature of televangelist speeches. 

In short, the logic of televangelism allows Falwell to call on the « moral majority » to mobilise itself in defence of Christian values. In this text, he clearly calls for a national revival meeting around political and spiritual leaders by directly addressing the conscience of his reader. In essence, this text seeks to reshape a secularised American society in the image of a megachurch. 

## Conclusion 

In conclusion, in *Listen America* Jerry Falwell couples fundamentalist Christianity with conservative Republicanism to praise for a spiritual and political rebirth of America and thus confirms and exalts the Moral majority’s support to Reagan’s candidacy. To do so he deploys its arguments on three levels. Firstly, as a evangelical preacher he seems to give a eschatological sermon preaching the necessity of a spiritual renewal of a decadent nation. Secondly, he adopts a conservative stance that denounces the amoral forces that threatens society and tries to conciliate Christianity and capitalism. Finally, spiritual and secular affairs merge in the logic of televangelism. Indeed the charismatic minister delivers in this text a speech addressed to a « Moral majority » that praises the urgent need of spiritual and political leadership to pick the Nation up. Christian fundamentalism and conservative Republicanism merge in the implicit but  nevertheless mobilising metaphor of the America’s revival that makes the country in the image of a national megachurch. 
Overall, the Moral Majority played a significant role in the victory of Ronald Reagan in 1980 and shaped the political landscape of the United States during the Reagan era, promoting conservative values and mobilising religious voters to support conservative candidates and policies. But televangelism has been subject to criticism and controversy, particularly in the 1980s when several high-profile televangelists were implicated in political,  financial and sexual scandals. For instance in 1984 Falwell was ordered to pay damages to a gay-friendly church that he called on television « a vile and Satanic system ». Nonetheless, in recent years, evangelicalism reappeared in force in America’s politics in an even more populist and nationalist form especially during Donald Trump’s presidency. In January 2021, Paula White, a Pentecostal preacher and televangelist that was Trump’s spiritual adviser throughout his presidency. delivered a re-election prayer during which she called for God to « expose » and « scatter » the enemies of Trump.






